A Region to the N-terminal Side of the CTCF Zinc Finger Domain Is
Essential for Activating Transcription from the Amyloid Precursor
Protein Promoter*

From the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, State University of New York,
Stony Brook, New York 11794-8101

Transcription from the amyloid precursor protein
(APP) promoter is largely dependent on a nuclear factor
binding site designated as APB. The protein that binds
to this site is the multifunctional transcription factor
CTCF, which consists of 727 amino acids and contains a
domain of 11 zinc finger motifs that is flanked by 267
amino acids on the N-terminal side and 150 amino acids
on the C-terminal side. Depleting HeLa cell nuclear ex-
tract of endogenous CTCF specifically reduced tran-
scriptional activity from the APP promoter. However,
transcriptional activity was restored by replenishing
the depleted extract with recombinant CTCF. Deleting
201 amino acids from the C-terminal end of CTCF had no
detrimental
effect
on
transcriptional
activation,
whereas deleting either 248 or 284 amino acids from the
N-terminal end abolished transcriptional activation.
Competing endogenous CTCF in vivo was accomplished
by cotransfecting COS-1 cells with a plasmid overex-
pressing CTCF constructs and a reporter plasmid con-
taining the APP promoter. Under these conditions, an
N-terminal deletion of CTCF reduced expression from
the APP promoter, whereas the C-terminal deletion had
no effect. These results demonstrate that CTCF acti-
vates transcription from the APP promoter and that the
activation domain is located on the N-terminal side of
the zinc finger domain.

deposition in transplanted murine hippocampal tissue with
trisomy 16, the mouse equivalent of Down’s syndrome (10).
These observations suggest that overexpression of APP may be
one of several contributing factors in the formation of amyloid
depositions and in the neuropathology associated with Alzhei-
mer’s disease.
The promoter of the APP gene is a necessary element in
regulating APP transcription, and it has been shown to confer
some degree of cell type-specific expression in transgenic mice
(11, 12). The proximal APP promoter is devoid of CCAAT and
TATA boxes but contains a prominent initiator element asso-
ciated with the main transcriptional start site (1). The integ-
rity of this initiator element is essential for both start site
selection and optimal transcriptional activity (13). In addition,
an intact nuclear factor binding site designated APB is essen-
tial for effective transcription from the APP promoter (13, 14).
The core recognition sequence for this binding site is located
between positions 82 and 93 (Fig. 1C), and its elimination
reduces transcriptional activity by 70–90% (13, 14). The nu-
clear factor that activates transcription from APB was iden-
tified as CTCF (15), a nuclear regulatory protein comprising
727 amino acids (16). It contains a centrally located DNA
binding domain with 11 zinc finger motifs that is flanked by
267 amino acids on the N-terminal side and 150 amino acids on
the C-terminal side (Fig. 1, A and B). Selective deletions from
the N- and C-terminal sides of the zinc finger domain showed
that the N-terminal end of the zinc finger domain was aligned
toward the transcriptional start site (15).
CTCF was first described as a factor that binds to the
chicken c-MYC promoter (17) and to the silencer element of the
chicken lysozyme gene (18, 19). CTCF binds to diverse se-
quences by utilizing different combinations of essential zinc
fingers (16, 19). Consequently, a defined DNA recognition se-
quence cannot readily be recognized. The function of CTCF in
gene regulation is also diverse. For example, CTCF binds to the
chicken lysozyme silencer 2.4 kilobase pairs upstream from the
transcriptional start site. Here it synergistically represses
transcription in conjunction with the thyroid hormone receptor
or the retinoic acid receptor (18, 20). Another example of syn-
ergistic repression is provided by the coordinate action of CTCF
and the thyroid hormone receptor on the TRE-containing rat
genomic element 144 (21, 22). Furthermore, CTCF has been
found to directionally block enhancer activation by binding to
the insulator element at the 5 end of the chicken -globin gene
locus (23). Similar CTCF -binding sequences were identified in
a variety of insulators from diverse vertebrate species, suggest-
ing a widespread role for CTCF in the regulation of enhancer-
activated genes (23). CTCF also binds to the proximal promoter
of the chicken c-MYC gene where it acts either as a transcrip-
tional repressor or activator (17, 24, 25). In the human and

A defining neuropathological manifestation of Alzheimer’s
disease and Down’s syndrome is the extracellular deposition of
amyloid -protein (1–3). The amyloid -protein peptide is de-
rived by proteolytic cleavage from a group of proteins desig-
nated amyloid -protein precursors (APP),1 and these are de-
rived from the same gene by differential splicing (4). The APP
gene is differentially expressed in all major tissues, with the
highest levels observed in kidney and brain (5, 6). Increased
levels of APP gene transcript have been observed in Down’s
syndrome and in certain areas of the brain in Alzheimer’s
disease (6–9). Overexpression of APP also leads to amyloid

This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.

Expression of Recombinant CTCF Constructs in Pichia pastoris—The
cDNA encoding human CTCF was amplified by the polymerase chain
reaction from a cDNA library derived from the human retinoblastoma
cell line Y79 (CLONTECH) (27). Deletions from the 5 end were intro-
duced at restriction sites AccI (position 965) and Bsu36I (position 1216),
resulting in primary translation products with N-terminal transcrip-
tional start sites at positions Met-249 and Met-285, respectively. Dele-
tions from the 3 end were introduced at restriction sites BglII (position
2142) and PstI (position 1867), yielding translation products with C-
terminal deletions at positions Asp-617 and Cys-525, respectively (Fig.
1, A and B).
Expression of CTCF and its deletion constructs in yeast was accom-
plished with the Pichia Expression Kit (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cDNA encoding full-length CTCF
or its N- and C-terminal deletions was excised from plasmid pGEM
7Z() (Promega) and cloned either into the EcoRI site of plasmid
pHIL-D2 or between the BamHI and NotI sites of plasmid pCIP3.5
(Invitrogen). Both are vectors that direct intracellular recombinant
protein expression in P. pastoris. The vectors containing the CTCF
cDNA constructs in the correct orientation were transformed into
Pichia strain KM71 by electroporation. Positive clones were amplified,
induced for recombinant protein expression, and screened for the pres-
ence of CTCF by mobility shift electrophoresis.
Purification of CTCF—Recombinant CTCF proteins were extracted
and purified from P. pastoris as described (27) with some modifications.
Pichia cells (10–15 g) were mixed with 25 ml of 0.5-mm glass beads,
adjusted to a total volume of 50 ml with buffer F (40 mM HEPES, pH
7.6, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT, 100 mM KCl, 1 M urea, and
10 M ZnSO4), and homogenized with the Bead Beater apparatus (Bio-
spec Products, Inc., Bartensville, OK). Cell debris was pelleted at
5,000  g for 10 min, and the supernatant was supplemented with 3 M
KCl to a final concentration of 200 mM. The lysate was further clarified
by centrifugation at 100,000  g for 60 min.
CTCF was purified from the extracts by single step SP cation ex-
change chromatography. Briefly, a 1-ml HiTrap SP-Sepharose column
(Amersham Biosciences) was equilibrated with buffer F containing 200
mM KCl. Cleared extract was loaded on the column, and proteins were
eluted with a linear concentration gradient of KCl (0.2–1 M) in buffer F.
Fractions of 0.5 ml were collected, and the CTCF binding activity was
monitored by mobility shift electrophoresis. Fractions containing the
peak activity were concentrated 10-fold with a Microcon-30 centrifu-
gal device (Millipore). It must be noted that the presence of 1 M urea is
necessary for successful concentration. In the absence of urea, CTCF
and especially some truncated forms of the protein are prone to bind to
the concentrator’s membrane.
Antibodies—Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against the N-terminal
part of CTCF were prepared as described elsewhere (26). The antibodies
were affinity-purified on recombinant CTCF attached to a Ni2-chelat-
ing column (28). Specifically, recombinant full-length CTCF containing
a His tag at its N terminus was expressed in P. pastoris and purified as
described above. The protein was loaded on a 1-ml HiTrap chelating
column (Amersham Biosciences, Inc.) charged with NiSO4. The column
was first washed with 3 volumes of buffer E (40 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 2
mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT) containing 500 mM KCl and then
with 3 volumes buffer E containing 300 mM KCl. Rabbit anti-CTCF
serum (10 ml) was diluted with an equal volume of buffer E containing
400 mM KCl and loaded on the column. The column was washed with 5
volumes of buffer E containing 200 mM KCl. Antibody was eluted with
3 ml of 4 M MgCl2. The eluate was dialyzed overnight against 500 ml of
buffer D (40 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT,
100 mM KCl, and 10% glycerol) with one change of dialysis buffer.
Antibody was concentrated with a Centriplus-30 centrifugal device
(Millipore) to a final volume of 0.4 ml. The resulting antibody recog-
nized a single CTCF band on Western blots of whole HeLa cell nuclear
extract. Antibody titer was determined by mobility supershift electro-
phoresis, which was performed as described elsewhere (26) using 2 l of
HeLa cell nuclear extract and increasing amounts of the affinity puri-
fied antibody. Under these conditions 0.3 l of the antibody was suffi-
cient to completely shift the band corresponding to the oligonucleotide-
CTCF binding complex.
Immunodepletion of CTCF from Nuclear Extracts—Nuclear extract
from HeLa cells was prepared as described elsewhere (13, 29). To
deplete CTCF from nuclear extract, 60 l of the affinity-purified anti-
bodies were added to 400 l of the extract and incubated for 30 min at
25 °C. The extract was cleared by centrifugation at 10,000  g for 10
min and mixed with 80 l of protein G-Sepharose (Amersham Bio-

FIG. 1. CTCF and the proximal APP promoter. A, amino acid
sequence of human CTCF (16). The N-terminal methionine is desig-
nated as M1. All other amino acids designating the positions of specific
deletions are indicated by the specific amino acid followed by its posi-
tion in the sequence. Zinc fingers are indicated by brackets. B, sche-
matic representation of CTCF indicating the N-terminal, C-terminal,
and zinc finger domain. The approximate positions of N- and C-terminal
deletions are indicated by arrows. C, sequence of the proximal APP
promoter from position 120 to 15. The primary transcriptional start
site is designated as position 1. Boxed sequences include the core
recognition sequences for transcription factors CTCF (APB) (14, 15),
sp1 (37), USF (APB) (14, 38), and the initiator sequence surrounding
the transcriptional start sites from position 4 to 1 (13). Black bar
indicates the DNase I-protected domain produced by full-length CTCF
(FLCTCF) together with the orientation of the N- and C-terminal end of
the zinc finger domain (27).

mouse c-myc, genes CTCF binds to divergent sequences that
coincide with RNA polymerase pausing sites within the tran-
scribed region of the genes (16).
The above examples illustrate that CTCF primarily acts as a
negative regulator of transcription. In contrast, some of our
previous studies (13–15, 26) have provided indirect evidence
implicating CTCF as a transcriptional activator of the APP
promoter. The mechanism by which CTCF exerts its diverse
regulatory effects remains unclear. However, it is likely to
involve interactions with specific secondary factors. We provide
here direct evidence both in vitro and in vivo that CTCF acti-
vates transcription from the APP promoter and that this acti-
vation requires the N-terminal end of the molecule.

sciences), which had been equilibrated with buffer D. The extract was
incubated for 30 min at 25 °C and gently stirred periodically to keep the
resin in suspension. The resin was removed by centrifugation at
10,000  g for 10 min. The extract was aliquoted and stored at 80 °C.
A control sample of native HeLa cell nuclear extract was subjected to
exactly the same procedure except that in the initial incubation buffer
D was used in place of the antibodies. This control preparation is
referred to as whole nuclear extract.
Mobility Shift Electrophoresis—The double-stranded oligonucleotide
APB-80WT (15) was 5 end-labeled with [-32P]ATP using T4 polynu-
cleotide kinase (30). This oligonucleotide contained the APP promoter
sequence from position 110 to 64, which includes the APB core
recognition sequence for CTCF (Fig. 1C). Recombinant CTCF was di-
luted with buffer F containing 500 mM KCl. The binding reaction was
assembled by first mixing 0.5 l of diluted CTCF and 1 l of CTCF-
depleted nuclear extract with binding buffer (buffer D), supplemented
with 5 g of yeast tRNA, 2 g of poly(dI-dC)poly(dI-dC), and CHAPS to
a final concentration of 2.5% in a total volume of 16 l. Alternatively,
the control reaction mixtures contained a total of 1 l of HeLa nuclear
extract (whole or depleted) with no CTCF added. The mixture was
preincubated for 5 min at 25 °C followed by the addition of 1 l of
labeled double-stranded oligonucleotide (20 ng per binding reaction;
50,000–200,000 cpm) in binding buffer. The final binding reactions
were incubated for 30 min at 25 °C and then supplemented with 1.5 l
of fetal calf serum and electrophoresed in 6% polyacrylamide gels con-
taining 0.5 Tris borate/EDTA (30) at 100–150 constant voltage. The
gels were dried, and the amount of bound and free oligonucleotide was
quantitated with a GS-250 PhosphorImager (Bio-Rad). Binding activity
was expressed in mobility shift units (msu). One msu was designated as
the amount of protein that completely binds 1 ng of 80-mer oligonucleo-
tide APB-80WT during mobility shift electrophoresis.
Special conditions were employed in the binding reactions for mobil-
ity shift electrophoresis in experiments dealing with in vitro competi-
tion of native CTCF with purified recombinant CTCF proteins. In this
case the binding conditions were adjusted to reproduce exactly the
conditions of the corresponding in vitro transcription reaction (see be-
low). Recombinant CTCF was diluted with buffer F containing 500 mM
KCl, and 0.7 l was mixed with 2 l of depleted nuclear extract, 5 g of
yeast tRNA, and 2 g of poly(dI-dC)poly(dI-dC). The volume was ad-
justed to 8 l with buffer E bringing the final KCl concentration to 100
mM, and the mixture was incubated at 25 °C for 1 min. Subsequently,
25 ng of labeled 80-mer oligonucleotide APB-80WT was added to this
mixture. This represented approximately the same molar amount of
APB CTCF-binding sequence present in 2 g of the plasmid DNA that
was used in the in vitro transcription reaction (see below). This mixture
was preincubated for 10 min at 25 °C. During this time, in a separate
tube, 2 l of whole nuclear extract was mixed with 5 g of yeast tRNA
and 2 g of poly(dI-dC)poly(dI-dC) and adjusted to a total volume of 8
l with buffer E. After an additional minute at 25 °C the mixtures were
combined, and the binding reaction was continued for 30 min at 30 °C.
The samples were analyzed by mobility shift electrophoresis as de-
scribed above.
In Vitro Transcription—We optimized our in vitro transcription pro-
tocol (13) to better suit the aims of this study. The reaction buffer
contained 40 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT,
75 mM KCl, and 10% glycerol. Our preliminary tests indicated that the
highest in vitro transcriptional activity from the APP promoter was
achieved at a 75 mM KCl concentration. We also found that up to 0.75
l of 1 M urea could be added to a 16-l reaction mixture without
significantly affecting the activity of either the APP or -actin promot-
ers. The in vitro transcription reaction mixture contained 4 l of nu-
clear extract, 2 g of the plasmid APP(488) (13), which is based on
reporter plasmid pCAT2bGAL (31), and 600 M of each NTP in a total
volume of 16 l. Recombinant CTCF was diluted with buffer F contain-
ing 500 mM KCl. The same volume of 0.5 l of diluted CTCF or buffer
F was added to all the reaction samples to maintain a constant concen-
tration of urea. The sample volume was balanced with buffers D and E
to bring the final KCl concentration to 75 mM. After incubation for 30
min at 30 °C, 0.4 g of poly(A) was added to the samples as a carrier,
and RNA was purified with the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). The RNA
was eluted with 30 l of RNase-free H2O, which yielded 23 l of
eluate. The eluate was combined with 6 l of 5 annealing buffer
containing 75 mM Tris, pH 7.6, 1.5 M NaCl, 50 mM MgCl2, 60 mM DTT,
and 1 l (3 pmol, 50,000–200,000 cpm) of each of the primers specific for
APP and -actin promoter transcripts (13). The mixture was incubated
at 99 °C for 5 min and at 75 °C for 20 min and then transferred to 48 °C.
To the annealing mixture was added 10 l of a reverse transcriptase
reaction mixture containing 12.5 mM Tris, pH 7.6, 10 mM MgCl2, 12.5

mM DTT, and 6 mM of each of the dNTPs, supplemented with 20 units
of avian myoblastosis virus-reverse transcriptase and 20 units of RNa-
sin (both Roche Molecular Biochemicals). The reaction was continued at
48 °C for 90 min and stopped by phenol/chloroform extraction followed
by ethanol precipitation. The primer extension products were separated
on a 6% sequencing gel and quantitated with a GS-250 PhosphorImager
(Bio-Rad).
In experiments where native CTCF was competed with purified
recombinant CTCF proteins, the reaction mixture was assembled in a
modified way to allow for preliminary binding of the recombinant CTCF
to the APB site. Briefly, 0.7 l of buffer F containing 500 mM KCl and
recombinant CTCF at the desired dilution were combined with 2 l of
depleted HeLa cell nuclear extract and 2 g of reporter plasmid. The
volume of the sample was adjusted to 8 l with buffer E. After incuba-
tion at 25 °C for 10 min, 2 l of whole HeLa cell nuclear extract, 3 l of
buffer D, and 2 l of buffer E were added to each sample. The tran-
scription reaction was carried out at 30 °C, and the products were
analyzed as described above.
In Vivo Competition—The rationale for these competition experi-
ments was to analyze the effect of intracellular recombinant CTCF
expression on the expression from a cotransfected APP promoter con-
struct. The APP promoter from position 488 to 100 was cloned into
the polycloning site of plasmid pCAT2bGAL (31), which is located
immediately upstream of the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltrans-
ferase (CAT) gene. The plasmid also contains the -galactosidase gene,
which is transcribed from the -actin promoter and serves as an inter-
nal control for experimental variations. For the expression of CTCF by
transient transfection, full-length CTCF, N-terminal deletion Met-285,
and C-terminal deletion Cys-525 were provided with a green fluores-
cent protein (GFP) tag on the 5 end of the respective CTCF cDNA
constructs. The reading frame for GFP was obtained from plasmid
pEGFP-N1 (CLONTECH), which was cut at restriction site BsrG1 and
blunt-ended with T4 DNA polymerase. This operation eliminated the
stop codon and the codon for the C-terminal amino acid of the GFP
reading frame. The blunt-ended fragment was then cloned in-frame to
the 5 end of the three CTCF constructs. The resulting CTCF con-
structs, GFP-FL, GFP-M285, and GFP-C525 were subcloned into the
polycloning site of plasmid pcDNA3.1 (Invitrogen), which is located
downstream from the CMV promoter. As a control, the entire GFP
reading frame alone was also cloned into the same position of plasmid
pcDNA3.1.
The cell line COS-1 was used for the in vivo competition of endoge-
nous CTCF with recombinant CTCF expressed from transiently trans-
fected pcDNA3.1 plasmid constructs. This cell line displays an 10-fold
higher transfection efficiency (about 50%) than HeLa cells. In addition
it has been transformed to express the SV40 large T antigen. This
allows for the episomal replication of plasmid pcDNA3.1, which con-
tains the SV40 origin of replication. These properties allow for a con-
sistently high level of expression of recombinant CTCF from transfected
plasmids.
COS-1 cells were grown to about 70% confluence in 25-cm2 flasks and
were then transfected with 2 g of plasmid mixture per flask using the
FuGENE reagent according to manufacturer’s instructions (Roche Mo-
lecular Biochemicals). The plasmid mixture contained the APP reporter
plasmid (APP(488)) and the CTCF expression vector (pcDNA3.1) at a
molar ratio of 4:1. This ratio was found to be optimal both for CTCF
expression and APP promoter activity. The FuGENE/plasmid mixture
was left on the cells for about 16 h. The cells were then examined by
fluorescence microscopy and harvested. CAT and -galactosidase as-
says were performed as described elsewhere (14). The CAT activities
resulting from the APP promoter construct was normalized to identical
-galactosidase activities. Subsequently, in each experiment the APP
promoter activity obtained with the cotransfected control GFP expres-
sion plasmid was assigned the value 100%.

Depleting Nuclear Extract of CTCF Reduces Transcriptional
Activity from the APP Promoter—HeLa cell nuclear extract
supports in vitro transcription from both the -actin and APP
promoters. Transcription from the -actin promoter depends on
a CCAAT and TATA box as well as a serum-response element
(32, 33). In contrast, the APP promoter is TATA-less, which
indicates that the two promoters are transcribed by different
mechanisms. Transcription from the -actin promoter is initi-
ated at one primary start site, whereas the APP promoter is
initiated at multiple sites from position 1 to 4 (Fig. 2B, lane

amount of CTCF added (Fig. 3A, lanes 1–5). In a similar man-
ner, transcriptional activity from the APP promoter was re-
stored to levels approximating those of whole nuclear extract,
whereas the transcriptional activity from the -actin promoter
remained unaffected. Incidentally, no CTCF binding activity
can be detected in control Pichia extracts, and such extracts do
not support transcription from the APP promoter (data not
shown). These results demonstrate that CTCF activates tran-
scription from the APP promoter in vitro and that the recom-
binant version of the protein expressed in P. pastoris can re-
place endogenous CTCF depleted from HeLa cell nuclear
extract.
The N-terminal Domain of CTCF Is Essential for Restoring
Transcriptional Activity from the APP Promoter in Depleted
Nuclear Extracts—The domains of CTCF that are located to the
N- and C-terminal side of the zinc finger domain are not essen-
tial for DNA binding (27). However, they may contribute to
functional activity. To address this issue, we analyzed CTCF
deletions from the N- and C-terminal ends that had been pu-
rified from P. pastoris (Fig. 1, A and B). The deletions were
used to supplement CTCF-depleted HeLa cell nuclear extract,
and their effect on transcriptional activity was assessed.
Two N-terminal deletions were constructed that resulted in
primary translational start sites at methionine residues 249
and 285 (Fig. 1A) (32). Deletion Met-249 removed much of the
N-terminal domain, whereas deletion Met-285 extended into
the first zinc finger. The two C-terminal deletions terminated
at cysteine residue 525 and aspartic acid residue 617. C-termi-
nal deletion Asp-617 removed 109 amino acids of the C-termi-
nal end of CTCF without extending into the zinc finger domain,
whereas in C-terminal deletion Cys-525, 201 amino acids were
deleted, which additionally eliminated peripheral zinc fingers
10 and 11 (Fig. 1, A and B). All N- and C-terminal deletions
displayed DNA binding activity to the APB sequence (Fig. 3A,
lanes 6–12). However, only the C-terminal deletions restored
transcriptional activity from the APP promoter proportionally
to their binding activity. In contrast, transcriptional activity
was not supported with the N-terminal deletions despite ade-
quate binding activity to the APB sequence (Fig. 3B, lanes
6–12). This observation was confirmed by combining data from
several independent experiments (Fig. 3C). CTCF-depleted ex-
tract was supplemented with different amounts of recombinant
full-length CTCF, N-terminal deletion Met-249, or C-terminal
deletion Cys-525. In each case only full-length CTCF and C-
terminal deletion Cys-525 provided a dose-dependent tran-
scriptional activation, whereas N-terminal deletion Met-249
showed little or no activation.
Competition of Endogenous CTCF with N-terminal Deletions
of Purified Recombinant CTCF Reduces in Vitro Transcrip-
tional Activity from the APP Promoter—Because both endoge-
nous CTCF and recombinant N- and C-terminal deletions bind
to the APB site of the APP promoter, it should be possible to
compete the binding of endogenous CTCF by supplementing
the native nuclear extract with an excess of N- and C-terminal
deletions. Indeed, mobility shift competition showed that add-
ing increasing amounts of recombinant N-terminal deletion
Met-249 to HeLa cell nuclear extract gradually shifted the
binding equilibrium from the endogenous CTCF toward the
N-terminal deletion (Fig. 4A, lanes 1–5). Similar shifts were
observed with N-terminal deletion Met-285 and C-terminal
deletion Cys-525 (Fig. 4A, lanes 5 and 7). When full-length
recombinant CTCF was added, the resulting mobility shift
complex was indistinguishable from the endogenous CTCF
binding complex, and the total amount of binding complex
formed was merely enhanced (Fig. 4A, lane 6).
However, in vitro transcription from the APP promoter was

FIG. 2. Depletion of CTCF from nuclear extract. A, native whole
HeLa cell nuclear extract was depleted of CTCF by immunoadsorption
and analyzed by mobility shift electrophoresis. The CTCF binding ac-
tivity present in 1 l of whole nuclear extract (lane 1) and in 1 l of
depleted extract (lane 5) is shown. The binding activity in whole nuclear
extract was assigned the relative value of 100%. While leaving the
amount of total extract in the binding reaction constant, the whole
extract was mixed with increasing amounts of depleted extract (lanes
2–4) resulting in an approximately proportional decrease in CTCF
binding. The positions of the APB-CTCF binding complex (b) and the
free oligonucleotide (f) are indicated (brackets). B, in vitro transcription
with the same extract combinations as in A, except that 4 l of extract
was used in the reaction (lanes 1–5). The transcriptional start sites from
the control -actin and the APP promoters are indicated (brackets). The
transcriptional activities from the APP promoter were normalized to
identical -actin promoter activities.

1). When HeLa cell nuclear extract was depleted of CTCF by
immunoprecipitation, transcription from the APP promoter
was drastically reduced to a level corresponding to 23% of the
activity observed with the non-depleted extract (Fig. 2B, lanes
1 and 5). When whole nuclear extract was mixed with increas-
ing amounts of CTCF-depleted extract, there was a gradual
decline in the transcriptional activity from the APP promoter
(Fig. 2B, lanes 2–4). In all cases transcriptional activity from
the -actin promoter remained unaffected (Fig. 2B, lanes 2–4).
The decrease in transcriptional activity was paralleled by a
comparable decrease in binding activity to the APB site (Fig.
2A, lanes 1–5).
Replenishing CTCF-depleted Nuclear Extract with Purified
Recombinant CTCF Restores Transcriptional Activity from the
APP Promoter—To determine whether purified recombinant
CTCF expressed in the yeast strain P. pastoris supports tran-
scriptional activity from the APP promoter, depleted nuclear
extract was replenished with increasing amounts of full-length
recombinant CTCF. Mobility shift electrophoresis showed that
binding to the APB site increased proportionally to the

FIG. 4. In vitro competition of native CTCF with purified re-
combinant CTCF proteins. A, in this experiment, 2 l of whole
nuclear extract were mixed with 2 l of CTCF-depleted extract (com-
pare Fig. 1). The 4 l of combined extract were then incubated with a
molar amount of radiolabeled APB oligonucleotide (20 ng) that corre-
sponded to the amount of the same sequence present in the reporter
plasmid used for in vitro transcription (below). The binding activity was
determined by mobility shift electrophoresis (lane 1). For competition
purposes, the extract was then mixed with increasing amounts of re-
combinant N-terminal CTCF deletion Met-249 (lanes 2–4) or Met-285
(lane 5), recombinant full-length CTCF (lane 6), and recombinant C-
terminal deletion Cys-525 (lane 7) (see “Experimental Procedures” for
details). The various binding complexes (b) and the free oligonucleotides
(f) are indicated by brackets. B, in vitro transcription was performed
with 4 l of nuclear extract consisting of 2 l of whole extract and 2 l
of CTCF-depleted extract (lane 1). Because these are the same condi-
tions as those described in Fig. 2B (lane 3), the normalized transcrip-
tional activity from the APP promoter was here retained at 67% for
comparison. The transcriptional activity was then determined with
extracts that contained increasing amounts of recombinant CTCF N-
terminal deletion Met-249 (lanes 2–4) or Met-285 (lanes 5 and 6),
full-length CTCF (lane 7), and C-terminal deletion Cys-525 (lane 8).

FIG. 3. Replenishment of CTCF-depleted HeLa cell nuclear
extract with recombinant CTCF. A, the CTCF binding activity in 1
l of whole nuclear extract (lane 1) and in 1 l of CTCF-depleted extract
(lane 2) were determined by mobility shift electrophoresis. Similarly,
the CTCF binding activity was determined by mixing 1 l of depleted
extract with increasing amounts of recombinant CTCF constructs pu-
rified from P. pastoris: full-length CTCF (lanes 3–5), C-terminal dele-
tions Cys-525 (lanes 6–8) and Asp-617 (lane 9), and N-terminal dele-
tions Met-249 (lanes 10 and 11) and Met-285 (lane 12). The binding
complexes (b) and the free oligonucleotides (f) are indicated (brackets).
The binding activity is expressed here as mobility shift units (see
“Experimental Procedures”). B, in vitro transcription with the same
extract combination as in A except that 4 l of whole (lane 1) and
depleted (lane 2) extract were used in the reaction. Amounts of purified
recombinant CTCF constructs (msu) proportional to those delineated in
A were then added to 4 l of CTCF-depleted extract, and the in vitro
transcriptional activity was determined (lanes 3–12). The transcrip-
tional activity resulting from the whole nuclear extract was assigned
the value 100%. C, these experiments were performed essentially as
described in Fig. 2B except that the graph represents a compilation of
data from numerous independent experiments with recombinant full-
length CTCF (FL), N-terminal deletion Met-249, and C-terminal dele-
tion Cys-525. The curves were generated by nonlinear regression anal-
ysis, resulting in R values of 0.94 (FL), 0.92 (C525), and 0.94 (M249).

only reduced by the addition of N-terminal deletions of Met-249
and Met-285, and this reduction was somewhat more pro-
nounced with deletion Met-285 (Fig. 4B, lanes 1–6). In con-
trast, the addition of recombinant full-length CTCF and C-
terminal deletion Cys-525 increased transcriptional activity.
These results confirm that CTCF activates transcription from
the APP promoter and that the N-terminal domain is essential
for this activation.
In Vitro Transcription from the APP Promoter Is Unaffected
by Adding a GFP Tag to the N-terminal End of CTCF—The
results described above provide convincing evidence that CTCF
activates transcription from the APP promoter in vitro. Fur-
thermore, the activation is mediated by a portion of the CTCF
molecule that is located close to the N-terminal side of the zinc
finger domain. To complement this observation, it was of inter-
est to investigate whether similar results could be obtained in

cultured cells. Because CTCF is essential for cell survival, its
elimination from the cells was precluded. We therefore devised
an in vivo competition experiment to examine how the expres-
sion from a transfected APP promoter construct was affected by
the concomitant expression of selected cotransfected CTCF con-
structs. For the purpose of this assay, issues relating to the
effect of CTCF deletions on intracellular expression and nu-
clear translocation had to be resolved. Specifically, in the in
vitro assay the transcripts derived from the N-terminal dele-
tions contained different translational start sites than those
derived from full-length CTCF and the C-terminal deletions.
This was not an issue when the CTCF constructs were purified
from P. pastoris, because the amount of CTCF added for extract
complementation was normalized to DNA binding activity (mo-
bility shift units). However, the utilization of inappropriate
translational start sites in vivo could potentially result in vari-
able translation efficiencies between different CTCF deletion
constructs. We therefore decided to add the transcriptional unit
of the GFP in frame with the N-terminal ends of the CTCF
constructs. This addition of an N-terminal GFP tag served two
purposes. First, all constructs contained the same translational
start site, which minimized the possibility that the expression
of the CTCF constructs was influenced by differential utiliza-
tion of translational start sites. In addition, both the level of
expression and the subcellular localization of the CTCF con-
structs could be evaluated by fluorescence microscopy.
For the purpose of the in vivo competition assay, we selected
full-length CTCF, N-terminal deletion Met-285, and C-termi-
nal deletion Cys-525. Initially, all constructs were provided
with an N-terminal GFP tag, expressed in P. pastoris, and
purified by chromatography. The purified constructs were an-
alyzed by mobility shift electrophoresis. All GFP-tagged con-
structs supported binding to the APB sequence of the APP
promoter in a similar manner as their non-tagged counter-
parts. However, the presence of the GFP moiety resulted in a
slightly slower migration of the binding complex when com-
pared with full-length CTCF (Fig. 5A). When these GFP-tagged
CTCF constructs were used to supplement CTCF-depleted nu-
clear extract for in vitro transcription, transcriptional activa-
tion of the APP promoter was unaffected by the presence of the
N-terminal GFP tag. Specifically, full-length CTCF, full-length
GFP-CTCF, and GFP-C525 all activated transcription in pro-
portion to the number of mobility shift units added. In contrast,
the N-terminal deletion GFP-M285 did not activate transcrip-
tion (Fig. 5B). These results demonstrate that the N-terminal
addition of the GFP tag did not alter the property of the CTCF
constructs in the sense that their ability to bind to the APB
site and their ability to activate transcription from the APP
promoter remained unaffected.
Nuclear Translocation of CTCF Is Unaffected by N- or C-
terminal Deletions—As a regulator of numerous gene functions
CTCF unfolds its activity within the nucleus. However, follow-
ing synthesis in the cytoplasm the mechanism of nuclear trans-
location has not been adequately examined to date. Conse-
quently, it is conceivable that the extensive deletions of the N-
and C-terminal ends might interfere with or eliminate nuclear
translocation. To investigate this possibility, full-length GFP-
CTCF, GFP-M285, and GFP-C525 were cloned into the poly-
cloning site of vector pcDNA3.1 (Invitrogen). In this position
the three constructs were transcribed from the upstream CMV
promoter. As a negative control, the GFP transcriptional unit
alone was cloned into the same site of plasmid pcDNA3.1. As a
cell background for transfection, we chose the cell line COS-1
because it can be transfected at a high level of efficiency that
approximates 50%. Furthermore, the expression from the APP

FIG. 5. Replenishment of CTCF-depleted HeLa cell nuclear
extract with recombinant N-terminal GFP-tagged CTCF. A, the
CTCF binding activity in 1 l of whole nuclear extract (lane 1) and in 1
l of CTCF-depleted extract (lane 2) was determined by mobility shift
electrophoresis. The binding activity of recombinant CTCF protein was
determined by mixing 1 l of depleted extract with purified recombi-
nant full-length CTCF (lane 3), full-length GFP-tagged CTCF (lane 4),
GFP-tagged C-terminal deletion Cys-525 (lane 5), and GFP-tagged N-
terminal deletion Met-249 (lane 6). The binding complexes (b) and the
free oligonucleotides (f) are indicated (brackets). B, in vitro transcrip-
tion with 4 l of whole nuclear extract (lane 1) or CTCF-depleted
nuclear extract (lane 2). In vitro transcription was then performed with
CTCF-depleted extract that was supplemented with recombinant full-
length CTCF (lane 3), GFP-tagged full-length CTCF (lane 4), GFP-
tagged C-terminal deletion Cys-525 (lane 5), and GFP-tagged N-termi-
nal deletion Met-285. The transcriptional activities from the APP
promoter were normalized to those from the -actin promoter, and the
APP promoter activity in native nuclear extract was assigned the value
100%. The transcripts from the APP and -actin promoters are indi-
cated by brackets.

promoter is regulated in a manner identical to the previously
used HeLa cells.2

Cells were transfected under the same conditions as those
used for subsequent competition experiments (see below). Spe-
cifically, the reporter plasmid (APP(488)) was mixed at a
molar ratio of 4:1 with a pcDNA3.1 plasmid containing one of
the three GFP-tagged CTCF constructs or the GFP reading
frame alone. By using the Fugene reagent (Roche Molecular
Biochemicals), cells were exposed to the plasmid mixture for
16 h and then examined by fluorescence microscopy. The re-
sults show that a vast majority of GFP-tagged CTCF constructs
were localized to the nucleus (Fig. 6, B–D). In contrast, the
distribution of the GFP protein alone was primarily cytoplas-
mic (Fig. 6A). These results demonstrate that removing the N-
or C-terminal domains of CTCF does not affect the nuclear
translocation of the molecule.
In Vivo Competition Confirms that the N-terminal Domain of
CTCF Is Essential for Transcriptional Activation—The above
experiments established that the N-terminal GFP tag had no
discernible effect on the binding of the CTCF constructs to their
APB target sequence or on their properties associated with
transcriptional activation in vitro. In addition, the N- and
C-terminal deletions did not affect nuclear translocation. We
therefore proceeded to examine whether the transfected CTCF
constructs were able to compete with endogenous CTCF for the
expression from the cotransfected APP promoter construct. The
reporter plasmid (APP(488)) contained the APP promoter

2 A. A. Vostrov, M. J. Taheny, and W. W. Quitschke, unpublished
observations.

FIG. 7. In vivo competition of endogenous CTCF with trans-
fected recombinant CTCF. Cotransfection of an APP promoter re-
porter vector with expression vector pcDNA3.1 containing GFP alone
(GFP), full-length GFP-CTCF (GFP-FL), N-terminal CTCF deletion
GFP-M285, or C-terminal deletion Cys-525. In each experiment the
APP promoter activity obtained with GFP alone was assigned the
relative value of 100%. Error bars represent the S.E. of the mean from
8 to 10 independent experiments.

levels of expression from the APP promoter. Specifically, pro-
gressive deletions from the 5 end resulted in a 70–90% reduc-
tion in expression from the APP promoter upon removal of the
APB site. This was observed both by transient transfection in
HeLa cells and by in vitro transcription (13, 14). In addition,
block mutations within the APB core recognition sequence
that abolish CTCF binding have a similar effect as 5 deletions
that eliminate the site (13, 14). Furthermore, competition for
endogenous CTCF in HeLa cell nuclear extract with double-
stranded oligonucleotides containing two independent CTCF-
binding sites specifically reduced in vitro transcription from
the APP promoter (15). Investigations on embryonic mouse
hippocampal neurons showed a time- and differentiation-de-
pendent up-regulation of expression of both endogenous APP
transcript and transiently transfected APP promoter con-
structs (26). This increase in APP expression was largely de-
pendent on the presence of an intact CTCF-binding site
(APB). An increase in the level of CTCF in hippocampal
neurons as a function of differentiation was also observed. A
plausible interpretation of these results is that the level of
CTCF is a limiting factor in the expression of APP during
differentiation of mouse hippocampal neurons.
CTCF is a multifunctional protein that regulates the expres-
sion of a wide variety of genes. However, in most of these cases
CTCF acts as a selective repressor of transcription, as exem-
plified by the binding to gene silencers and insulators (see
Introduction) (34). CTCF also binds to the chicken c-MYC gene
between positions 180 and 210 upstream from the transcrip-
tional start site. It may act either as a transcriptional repressor
or activator depending on which cell background the promoter
is analyzed (17, 24, 25). In view of these divergent functions, a
demonstration that CTCF activates transcription from the APP
promoter was essential. We have here provided several lines of
direct evidence that this is the case. A large portion of this
evidence has been provided by in vitro transcription, because in
this system it is easier to control experimental parameters. In
contrast, experimental perturbations in vivo are inherently
more difficult to interpret because of the probability of second-
ary intracellular responses and interactions that are often be-
yond investigative control.
As a first step in demonstrating the requirement for CTCF in
transcriptional activation of the APP promoter, the HeLa cell
nuclear extract was selectively depleted by antibody adsorp-
tion. The depletion of CTCF was confirmed by mobility shift

FIG. 6. Subcellular localization of GFP-tagged recombinant
CTCF proteins synthesized in COS-1 cells. Fluorescence micros-
copy of COS-1 cells after transfection with expression vector pcDNA3.1
containing GFP alone or GFP-CTCF constructs. A, transfection with
GFP alone. Bracket denotes outline of whole cell showing cytoplasmic
distribution of GFP. B, transfection with GFP-FL. Arrows show nuclear
localization of GFP-FL CTCF transcript. C, transfection with N-termi-
nal CTCF deletion GFP-M285. D, transfection with C-terminal CTCF
deletion GFP-C525.

from position 488 to 100, which activated expression of the
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene. In addition, as an in-
ternal control, the same plasmid also contained the -actin
promoter driving the expression of the -galactosidase gene.
The reporter plasmid was cotransfected with a plasmid con-
taining either one of the GFP-tagged CTCF constructs or the
GFP reading frame alone. These CTCF constructs were tran-
scribed from the constitutive CMV promoter. The resulting
CAT activities were normalized to identical -galactosidase
activities, and the CAT activity obtained with the cotransfected
GFP open reading frame alone was set at 100%. The results
show that cotransfection of either the full-length GFP-CTCF or
C-terminal deletion GFP-C525 had no significant effect on the
expression from the APP promoter. In contrast, cotransfection
of N-terminal deletion GFP-M285 resulted in a reduction in
APP expression to 30% of the control value (Fig. 7). Under the
applied conditions these results were highly reproducible, and
they can be interpreted as demonstrating that the cotrans-
fected N-terminal deletion competes with endogenous CTCF
for the binding to the APP promoter. However, because the
binding of the N-terminal deletion is non-productive in terms of
transcriptional activation, a reduction in expression from the
APP promoter occurred. Similarly, the observation that the
full-length CTCF construct and the C-terminal deletion did not
increase APP promoter expression suggests that endogenous
CTCF is not a rate-limiting factor in this cell background. In
general, these results are consistent with those observed in
vitro, and they support the notion that transcriptional activa-
tion by CTCF is dependent upon the N-terminal domain of the
molecule.

We have previously presented extensive indirect evidence
that the nuclear factor binding site APB is essential for high

electrophoresis, and in vitro transcription from the APP pro-
moter was reduced to 23% compared with the undepleted ex-
tract (Fig. 2B). This residual level of transcription from the
APP promoter is consistent with transcriptional levels ob-
served with APP promoter constructs devoid of the APB site
both in vivo and in vitro (13, 14). Mixing CTCF-depleted extract
with increasing ratios of native extract restored the transcrip-
tional activity from the APP promoter. The restoration of tran-
scriptional activity was largely proportional to the increase in
CTCF binding activity to the APB site. Although these results
strongly suggest a direct role of CTCF in APP promoter acti-
vation, it could not be excluded that additional factors that
interact with CTCF were also removed by the antibody
depletion.
This concern was addressed by replenishing the depleted
extract with CTCF from a heterologous source. CTCF was
expressed in the yeast strain P. pastoris and was purified to
near-homogeneity. Interestingly, recombinant CTCF was able
to reactivate transcription from the APP promoter in depleted
extract in the same manner as the native CTCF (Fig. 3B). This
effect cannot necessarily be taken for granted because some
functions of CTCF have been shown to depend on posttransla-
tional modifications. For example, phosphorylation of CTCF is
correlated with specific differentiation pathways of human my-
eloid cells, and this modification may alter the affinity for
specific DNA-binding sites or alter the binding of cofactors (35).
Furthermore, dephosphorylation of casein kinase II-dependent
serine phosphorylation sites was associated with enhanced re-
pression of c-myc promoters. However, these phosphorylation
sites were located on the C terminus of the protein (36). We
have shown previously that the binding properties of recombi-
nant CTCF derived from Pichia is indistinguishable from their
native counterparts (27). The observation that recombinant
CTCF activates transcription indicates that either CTCF is
correctly modified in Pichia or that no specific posttransla-
tional modifications are necessary. However, the role of post-
translational modifications in transcriptional activation from
the APP promoter has not yet been determined.
Because recombinant CTCF activates transcription from the
APP promoter, specific deletions can be used to define the
domain that is essential for activation. Similar deletions were
employed to determine that the N-terminal end of the zinc
finger domain is aligned toward the transcriptional start site of
the APP promoter (27). In this study we investigated two de-
letions each from the N- (Met-249 and Met-285) and C-terminal
(Cys-525 and Asp-617) ends of CTCF (Fig. 1, A and B). Of these,
deletion Met-285 extended into zinc finger 2 from the N-termi-
nal side and deletion Cys-525 extended into zinc finger 11 from
the C-terminal side. Although these peripheral zinc fingers are
not essential for binding to the APP promoter per se, their
removal may reduce the stability of the binding complex (27).
In this case the absolute amount of CTCF construct present in
the reaction would not necessarily reflect its relative binding
activity. In addition, it is conceivable that during the purifica-
tion procedure of recombinant CTCF, a portion of the molecules
might be rendered functionally inactive. It therefore became
necessary to normalize the binding activity of the CTCF dele-
tions to their potential to activate transcription. For this pur-
pose we introduced the concept of the mobility shift unit (msu)
(Fig. 3). This allowed for a direct comparison between the
transcriptional activation and the binding activity achieved
with each CTCF construct. The results show that the N-termi-
nal domain is essential for transcriptional activation, whereas
the C-terminal domain is dispensable. This conclusion was
further corroborated by competing endogenous CTCF with the
deletion fragments. However, it may be pointed out that N-

terminal deletion Met-285 inhibited transcription somewhat
more effectively than deletion Met-249 (Fig. 4). Although this
phenomenon was not further investigated systematically, it
suggested that the transcriptional activation domain of CTCF
is located in close proximity to the N-terminal end of the zinc
finger domain.
Because it was feasible to compete endogenous CTCF with
recombinant CTCF deletions in nuclear extract, we investi-
gated whether it was possible to achieve a similar competition
in vivo. Indeed, cotransfection of an APP promoter construct
with CTCF deletion Met-285 showed a dramatic decrease in
APP promoter activity. In contrast, APP promoter activity was
largely unaffected by cotransfection with recombinant full-
length CTCF and C-terminal deletion Cys-525. These results
support the in vitro observations that the N-terminal end of
CTCF is essential for transcriptional activation of the APP
promoter. They also suggest that in COS-1 cells the availability
of endogenous CTCF is not a limiting factor in transcriptional
activation, because APP promoter activity was unaffected by
the expression of additional recombinant CTCF. In contrast,
nuclear extract in vitro can be adjusted so that the amount of
endogenous CTCF becomes a limiting factor. In such a case,
providing additional recombinant CTCF results in an increase
in transcription from the APP promoter (Fig. 4).
In summary, these results provide the first direct evidence
that CTCF is required for APP promoter activation and that
the activation domain is located on the N-terminal side of
CTCF, presumably close to the zinc finger domain. The mech-
anism by which CTCF activates transcription is currently un-
der further investigation. However, preliminary evidence sug-
gests that CTCF acts by recruiting additional factors to the
transcription complex. An essential step in this process would
then be the binding of such a factor to the N-terminal domain
of CTCF.

1. Glenner, G. G., and Wong, C. W. (1984) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 122,
1131–1135
2. Mann, D. M., Jones, D., Prinja, D., and Purkiss, M. S. (1990) Acta Neuropathol.
80, 318–327
3. Masters, C. L., Simms, G., Weinman, N. A., Multhaup, G., McDonald, B. L.,
and Beyreuther, K. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 82, 4245–4249
4. Kang, J., Lemaire, H. G., Unterbeck, A., Salbaum, J. M., Masters, C. L.,
Grzeschik, K. H., Multhaup, G., Beyreuther, K., and Mu¨ller-Hill, B. (1987)
Nature 325, 733–736
5. Golde, T. E., Estus, S., Usiak, M., Younkin, L. H., and Younkin, S. G. (1990)
Neuron 4, 253–267
6. Neve, R. L., Finch, E. A., and Dawes, L. R. (1988) Neuron 1, 669–677
7. Cohen, M. L., Golde, T. E., Usiak, M. F., Younkin, L. H., and Younkin, S. G.
(1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 85, 1227–1231
8. Johnson, S. A., McNeill, T., Cordell, B., and Finch, C. E. (1990) Science 248,
854–857
9. Schmechel, D. E., Goldgaber, D., Burkhart, D., Gilbert, J. R., Gajdusek, D. C.,
and Roses, A. D. (1988) Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Discord. 2, 96–111
10. Richards, S.-J., Waters, J. J., Beyreuther, K., Masters, C. L., Wischik, C. M.,
Sparkman, D. R., White, C. L., III, Abraham, C. R., and Dunnett, S. B.
(1991) EMBO J. 10, 297–303
11. Fox, N. W., Johnstone, E. M., Ward, K. E., Schrementi, J., and Little, S. P.
(1997) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 240, 759–762
12. Wirak, D. O., Bayney, R., Kundel, C. A., Lee, A., Scangos, G. A., Trapp, B. D.,
and Unterbeck, A. J. (1991) EMBO J. 10, 289–296
13. Quitschke, W. W., Matthews, J. P., Kraus, R. J., and Vostrov, A. A. (1996)
J. Biol. Chem. 271, 22231–22239
14. Quitschke, W. W. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 21229–21233
15. Vostrov, A. A, and Quitschke, W. W. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 72, 33353–33359
16. Filippova, G. N., Fagerlie, S., Klenova, E. M., Myers, C., Dehner, Y., Goodwin,
G., Neiman, P. E., Collins, S. J., and Lobanenkov, V. V. (1996) Mol. Cell.
Biol. 16, 2802–2813
17. Lobanenkov, V. V., Nicolas, R. H., Adler, V. V., Paterson, H., Klenova, E. M.,
Polotskaja, A. V., and Goodwin, G. H. (1990) Oncogene 5, 1743–1753
18. Baniahmad, A., Steiner, C., Ko¨hne, A. C., and Renkawitz, R. (1990) Cell 61,
505–514
19. Burcin, M. R., Arnold, R., Lutz, M., Kaiser, B., Runge, D. F., Lottspeich, F.,
Filippova, G. N., Lobanenkov, V. V., and Renkawitz, R. (1997) Mol. Cell.
Biol. 17, 1281–1288
20. Ko¨hne, A. C., Baniahmad, A., and Renkawitz, R. (1993) J. Mol. Biol. 232,
747–755
21. Awad, T. A., Bigler, J., Ulmer, J. E., Hu, Y. J., Moore, J. M., Lutz, M., Neiman,
P. E., Collins, S. J., Renkawitz, R., Lobanenkov, V. V., and Filippova, G. N.

(1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 27092–27098
22. Bigler, J., and Eisenman, R. N. (1995) EMBO J. 14, 5710–5723
23. Bell, A. C., West, A. G., and Felsenfeld, G. (1999) Cell 98, 387–396
24. Klenova, E. M., Nicolas, R. H., Paterson, H. F., Carne, A. F., Heath, C. M.,
Goodwin, G., Neiman, P. E., and Lobanenkov, V. V. (1993) Mol. Cell. Biol.
13, 7612–7624
25. Klenova, E. M., Nicolas, R. H., U, S., Carne, A. F., Lee, R. E., Lobanenkov,
V. V., and Goodwin, G. H. (1997) Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 466–474
26. Yang, Y., Quitschke, W. W., Vostrov, A. A., and Brewer, G. J. (1999) J. Neu-
rochem. 73, 2286–2298
27. Quitschke, W. W., Fochtman, L. J., Taheny, M. J., and Vostrov, A. A. (2000)
Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 3370–3378
28. Gu, J., Stephenson, C. G., and Iadarola, M. J. (1994) BioTechniques 17,
257–262
29. Heberlein, U., and Tjian, R. (1988) Nature 331, 410–415
30. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989) Molecular Cloning: A
Laboratory Manual, 2nd Ed, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY

31. Quitschke, W. W., and Goldgaber, D. Y. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267,
17362–17368
32. Danilition, S. L., Frederickson, R. M., Taylor, C. Y., and Miyamoto, N. G.
(1991) Nucleic Acids Res. 19, 6913–6922
33. Quitschke, W. W., Lin, Z.-Y., DePonti-Zilli, L., and Paterson, B. M. (1989)
J. Biol. Chem. 264, 9539–9546
34. Ohlsson, R., Renkawitz, R., and Lobanenkov, V. (2001) Trends Genet. 17,
520–527
35. Delgado, M. D., Chernukhin, I. V., Bigas, A., Klenova, E. M., and Leon, J.
(1999) FEBS Lett. 444, 5–10
36. Klenova, E. M., Chernukhin, I. V., El-Kady, A., Lee, R. E., Pugacheva, E. M.,
Loukinov, D. I., Goodwin, G. H., Delgado, D., Filippova, G. N., Leon, J.,
Morse, H. C., III, Neiman, P. E., and Lobanenkov, V. V. (2001) Mol. Cell.
Biol. 21, 2221–2234
37. Pollwein, P., Masters, C. L., and Beyreuther, K. (1992) Nucleic Acids Res. 20,
63–68
38. Vostrov, A. A., Quitschke, W. W., Vidal, F., Schwarzman, A., and Goldgaber, D.
(1995) Nucleic Acids Res. 23, 2734–2741