MYB Binding  Sites  Mediate  Negative  Regulation of c-MYB Expression 
in  T-cell Lines 
By Juan Guerra, Donald A. Withers, and Linda M. Boxer 
In hematopoietic cell development, the c-myb transcription 
factor plays an important role. c-myb mRNA is expressed at 
high levels in immature proliferating cells and in leukemic 
cells.  We  have investigated the regulatory role of Myb pro- 
tein binding to the human c-myb promoter. Three Myb bind- 
ing sites have  been  described at approximately 600 bp up- 
stream of the cap  site.  By transient transfection assays in 
hematopoietic cell lines, we found that deletion of the pre- 
viously defined most 5' Myb binding site had no effect on 
activity, whereas deletion of the region containing the re- 
maining two Myb binding sites resulted in an increase in 
activity in both a T-cell line and a myeloid cell line.  To  spe- 
cifically test the importance of these two Myb binding sites, 
the activity of three-point mutation constructs was mea- 
HE c-myb PROTO-ONCOGENE is the cellular homo- 
logue of the avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV) and 
avian leukemia virus (E26) transforming genes.'.' The c-Myb 
protein is a transcription factor important for cell growth; 
therefore, the regulation of its expression is critically im- 
portant. c-Myb is a progression factor required for entry into 
the S phase of the cell ~ y c l e . ~ - ~  
It has been shown that c- 
myb mRNA is expressed at higher levels in hematopoietic 
cells of more immature phenotype and some leukemic cell 
lines as compared with mature cells?"' Reduction of  c-myb 
expression results in a block to hematopoietic precursor cell 
proliferation," and homozygous c-myb mutant mice show 
greatly impaired fetal hepatic hematopoiesis." The impor- 
tance of the c-myb gene product in leukemic cell proliferation 
is shown by the inhibition of cellular proliferation by c- 
myb antisense  oligonucleotide^.^ Further, leukemic cells are 
shown to be more sensitive to this inhibitory effect than 
normal hematopoietic cells.I3 
Myb is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein with the 
ability to transactivate promoters with the specific consensus 
sequence PyAACG/TG.'43'5 The c-myb gene product is a 
highly conserved 75 to 83 kD phosphoprotein that is predom- 
inantly expressed in hematopoietic tissues and localized to 
the nucleus.'6-20 The N-terminal region of the c-Myb protein 
contains three highly conserved imperfect repeats of 51-52 
amino acids that impart c-Myb's DNA binding specific- 
ity.'7-21*22 
c-Myb has been shown to transactivate several pro- 
moters, among these are the chicken miml gene,I5 c-myc 
promoter,23 human ~ - m y b , ~ ~   H ~ p 7 0 , ~ ~  
CD4,26 CD34,27 T-cell 
receptor 6;' 
and c d ~ 2 . ~ ~  
The A-myb and B-myb genes were isolated by cross-hy- 
bridization with a c-myb DNA probe. Both A-myb and B- 
myb have extensive sequence homology to c-myb, particu- 
larly in the DNA binding domain.30 The three members of 
the myb gene family show different cell type specificity in 
their expression. The sequence specificity for DNA binding 
for c-Myb and B-Myb are ~imilar.~' 
B-Myb has been shown 
to function as both a positive and negative regulator of tran- 
scription from promoters with Myb binding 
An imp0-t 
mechanism  for  regulation  of  mouse  c-myb  ex- 
pression is a block to transcription elongation within the first 
intron of the c-myb locus, recognized as a pause site.34-36 
T 
Blood, Vol 86, No 5 (September l), 1995: pp 1873-1880 
sured. Mutation of either Myb binding site resulted in an 
increase in activity compared with the wild-type promoter in 
T cells. Mutation of both sites produced even  higher activity. 
Transfection of the Myb site mutants into  the myeloid cell 
line resulted in no change in activity compared with the wild 
type construct. Results from gel shift analysis, UV cross- 
linking,  and  Western blots showed that both c-Myb and  B- 
Myb bound to  the Myb I and I1 sites.  We conclude that  the 
Myb family proteins negatively regulate c-myb expression 
in T-cell  lines in contrast to the positive regulation via  these 
sites, which has  been shown in fibroblasts. In addition, in a 
myeloid cell line, the Myb binding sites are nonfunctional. 
0 1995 by The American Society of Hematology. 
A correlation between protein binding to the intron 1 pause 
site and c-myb mRNA levels has been shown using DNA 
mobility-shift assays.37 
Regulation of transcriptional initiation of c-myb is less 
well understood. Primary DNA sequence analysis of the 5' 
regions of the chicken and mouse genes shows a number of 
potential Spl recognition sites and CACCC box sequences. 
Moreover, a highly homologous 124-bp sequence 5' of the 
major transcription start site of the chicken gene has been 
identified and has been shown to contain a TATA  box  and 
a DNase I-hypersensitive site at its 5' end.38339 
In vitro trans- 
lated c-Myb protein has been shown to bind to sequences in 
the c-myb 5' flanking region, and in cotransfection studies 
c-Myb protein is involved in positive autoregulation of c- 
myb expression in hamster fibroblasts.% Further studies of 
the regulation of transcription show that c-Jun and JunD 
contribute to the transcriptional activation of  c-myb in ham- 
ster fibroblasts by binding to an AP-1 binding site at nucleo- 
tide -149 from the cap site.40 Recent studies conducted in 
mouse T-cell lines suggest that murine c-myb expression is 
dependent on a GC rich region of the 5' flanking region and 
that the c-myb promoter is functional in diverse T cell lines?' 
A second promoter in the 3' end of intron 1 has been identi- 
fied recently."' 
In this study, we have investigated the role of the Myb 
From the Center for Molecular Biology in Medicine, Palo Alto 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center: and  the Department of Medicine, 
Stanford University School  of Medicine, Stanford, CA. 
Submitted November 30, 1994: accepted April 26, 1995. 
Supported by a grant from the Department of Veterans Affairs. 
J.G. was supported by the Stanford University School of Medicine 
Medical Scholars Program and by a Howard Hughes Research 
Training Fellowship for Medical Students. 
Address reprint requests to Linda M. Boxer, MD, PhD, Division 
of Hematology, S-161, Stanford University School  of Medicine, Stan- 
ford, CA 94305-51 12. 
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page 
charge payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked 
"advertisement" in accordance with 18 U.S.C. section 1734 solely to 
indicate this fact. 
0 
1995 by The American Society of Hematology. 
0006-4971/95/8605-0017$3.00/0 
1873 


1874 
GUERRA, WITHERS, AND BOXER 
binding  sites  in  the  human  c-myb  promoter. 
We have  focused 
on the  regulation  of  c-myb  expression  in  human  myeloid  and 
lymphoid  cell  lines.  Because  c-myb  is  preferentially 
ex- 
pressed in hematopoietic cells, our studies 
are relevant to 
the processes governing hematopoietic cell differentiation 
and proliferation. Our findings show a negative regulatory 
function for the Myb I and I1 binding sites in T cells. The 
previously described Myb 
I11 site does not contain 
a Myb 
consensus binding site, does not compete for Myb protein 
binding,  and  has  no  functional  activity  in T- or myeloid  cell 
lines. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Cell lines. K.562, Molt-4, and Jurkat cell lines were cultured in 
RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 
mmol/L L-glutamine, 50 U/mL penicillin G, and 50 pg/mL strepto- 
mycin. 
Construction of reporter plasmids. The HindIII-BamH1 frag- 
ment  of the luciferase reporter vector was derived from pSV232AL- 
AA5' (obtained from D. Helinski, University of California San 
Diego). The fragment was cloned into pUC18 and subsequently recut 
as a HindIII-Kpn I fragment and ligated into the multiple cloning 
site of Bluescript I1 KS+. The 2.3-kb EcoRI-EcoRI S' flanking 
region of  human  c-myb (a kind gift from R. Dalla-Favera, Columbia 
University, New York, NY) was ligated into the EcoRI site S' of 
the luciferase gene in Bluescript. To remove a confounding ATG 
site, the HindIII-Nco I fragment was removed, HindIII linkers were 
added, and  the plasmid religated. A deletion of the 5' flanking region 
was made using a unique BarnHI restriction site located at -910 
from the ATG codon. Further deletions were made using Ba131 
endonuclease. Deletions were made at 30-second intervals from 
BamHl linearized plasmid. The deleted end was then treated with 
Klenow polymerase, cut with HindIII, and separated by gel electro- 
phoresis. A vector was prepared by removing the  HindIIIINor I (Nor 
I site treated with Klenow polymerase) fragment of the luciferase/ 
bluescript construct, and the fragment and luciferase vector were 
ligated. Linear vectors lacking any Bluescript sequences were pre- 
pared by restriction enzyme digestion followed by gel purification. 
Mutagenesis of Myb I and Myb I1 binding sites was achieved 
using a technique previously described by Hig~chi.~' 
The resulting 
fragment was digested and ligated into the BamH1-Hind111 construct, 
which had been deleted for the corresponding wild-type fragment. 
Mutants were screened by restriction enzyme analysis and subse- 
quently sequenced using the Fmol sequencing kit (Promega, Madi- 
son, WI) or the Sequenase kit (US Biochemical, Cleveland, OH). 
Compressions were resolved with deoxyinosine triphosphate or 
deaza deoxyguanosine triphosphate. The oligonucleotide sequences 
used for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers are (mutated bases 
are in bold face): Myb I mutant: TAAATTAGAGGTGAAGTT- 
TATITAAG; Myb I1 mutant: GTCACTAACTAGAGGAAT- 
TAGAG. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). Double-stranded 
oligonucleotide probes of the Myb binding sites were made on an 
Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA) 380B oligonucleotide synthe- 
sizer. The oligonucleotide sequences used were as follows (Myb 
binding site underlined): MI: ATTAGAGATGTTA'ITTA'MT; MII: 
GTCCT. 
The oligonucleotides were synthesized with 5' overhangs and end- 
labeled with w3*P-deoxycytidine triphosphate and Klenow. Binding 
conditions were as follows: 10 mmol/L HEPES pH 7.9, 5 mmol/L 
TRIS-HCI pH 7.5, 50 mmol/L NaC1, I mmol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L 
DTT, 10% glycerol, 2 pg poly(d1-dC), 0.5 ng lo4 cpm end-labeled 
CACTAACAAGTTAAATTAGA; MIII: CACTTGTATTGAAGC- 
DNA oligonucleotide probe and 
5 to  15 
pg protein from 
crude 
nuclear extract. The binding reaction was conducted at room temper- 
ature for 15 minutes and  then  loaded onto a 5% polyacrylamide gel 
in glycine buffer (190 mmol/L glycine, 25 mmol/L TRIS-HCI pH 
8.5, 1 mmol/L EDTA). The samples were electrophoresed at 30 mA 
at 4°C. For the competition studies 100-fold molar excess of unla- 
beled competitor oligonucleotide was added to  the  binding reaction. 
Transfections and luciferase assays. Transfections were  per- 
formed on cells in log phase. Cells were washed and resuspended 
in unsupplemented RPMI medium to a final concentration of 3 X 
IO' cells/mL for Molt-4 cells and 8 X 10' cells/mL for K562 cells and 
incubated for I O  minutes at room temperature and  4"C, respectively. 
Electroporations were performed with the Bio-Rad Gene Pulser (Bio- 
Rad Laboratories, Richmond, CA) at 290 mV, 960 pF for Molt-4 
cells and 300 mV, 500 pF for K562 cells. The cells were then 
incubated again for IO minutes at room temperature and  4"C, respec- 
tively. Transfected cells were cultured in I O  mL of supplemented 
RPMI for 48 hours. 
Cell lysis and luciferase assays were conducted according to the 
protocol and  with 
reagents supplied with Promega's Luciferase 
Assay System. Luciferase measurements were performed on an LKB 
125 1 luminometer (Wallac Inc, Gaithersburg, MD). A plasmid to 
control for variation in transfection efficiency could not be used 
because the c-myb promoter was found to compete with the other 
commonly used promoters. Equal amounts of extract protein were 
assayed, and each transfection was repeated at least six times with 
at least three different DNA preparations. The average value with 
the SD is plotted. 
Ultraviolet cross-linking and sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacryl- 
amide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). EMSA was 
performed as 
described above except that the reaction was scaled up three-fold. 
The wet gel was exposed to  film  to locate the complexes. UV cross- 
linking was performed essentially as describedM on a short-wave 
UV light box at 4°C for 1 hour. The region of the gel containing 
the complexes was cut out, and the complexes were eluted at  room 
temperature overnight in 50 mmom TRIS HCI  pH 7.9, 0.1% SDS, 
0.1 mmol/L EDTA, 5 mmol/L DTT, 150 mmom NaCI, 0.1 mg/mL 
bovine serum albumin (BSA). The eluted protein was precipitated 
with 4 volumes of acetone, washed  with ethanol, and air dried. After 
resuspension in  Laemmli loading buffer, SDS-PAGE was performed, 
and the proteins were visualized by autoradiography. Western blots 
were performed as above with either UV cross-linked or noncross- 
linked protein. The anti-Myb antibody (BP2) was obtained from J. 
Lipsick, Stanford; it  was  used  at a dilution of 1:10,000. This antibody 
recognizes the DNA binding domain of c-Myb from man, mouse, 
and chicken, and it cross-reacts weakly with B-Myb. 
RESULTS 
The region of the c-myb promoter containing the Myb 
binding  sites  functions as a negative  regulator of expression. 
To elucidate  the role of  the 5' flanking  region  of  c-myb,  we 
constructed various deletions of the promoter using unique 
restriction  sites  and Ba131 exonuclease (Fig 1A). These  dele- 
tions  of  the  c-myb  promoter  region  were  linked  to 
a luciferase 
reporter gene in 
a bluescript vector. The constructs were 
electroporated into either  the  myeloid  cell  line K562 or the 
T-cell line Molt-4. 
To address the potentially confounding 
effect  of  putative  Myb  binding  sites  in  the  bluescript  vector,45 
we performed control experiments using linear fragments 
from  which  the  vector  sequences  had  been  removed.  Using 
three  such  constructs,  we  found  little  change  in  activity  com- 
pared  with  the  corresponding  supercoiled  myb  promoter-lu- 
ciferase  bluescript  constructs  in Molt4  and K562 cells. 


NEGATIVE REGULATION OF C-MY6 EXPRESSION 
C-MYB 5' FLANKING  REGION  CONSTRUCTS 
1875 
A 
Myb I11 
lryb 11 
W b  1 
Lucifaraaa 
-910 5' 
CACTTG 
CGTCCT 
I 
I 
GCAGGA 
-845 
-825 
-821 
W b  IT 
-787 
W b  1 
Lucifarau 
-836 
GAAGCGTCCT 
C A C T A A ~ R F T ? ~ . A T T A G A G ~ F ~ W ~ ~ T T A T T T  
~ T C G C A G G A  
G T G A T T W T A A T C T C A T A A A  
Lucifmrana 
r 
-731 5 '  
B 
IT1 
Mutant W b  TI 
W b  I 
Lucifarama 
MI rrmt 
CACTTG-CGTCCT 
CACTAA-AATTAGA-TTATTT 
r' 
GTGATT- 
A
A
M
 
T T A A T C T C W A T A A A  
* 
I11 
W b  TI 
Mutant W b  I 
Lucif*ram 
MII mut 5 '  
gtzlfG$GC 
CGTCCT 
CACTAA-ATTA 
r 
AGGA 
A
A
M
 
W b  TI1 
nutant W b  I1 
Mutant W b  I 
CACTAA 
TTAGACGF!~~&TTATTT 
GTGATT 
A
A
M
 
A
A
M
 
AATAAA 
Luciforau 
Fig 1. Luciferase  constructs  used in transient  transfection  assays. (A) Schematic  representation  of the c-myb  promoter-luciferase  constructs 
used  for  transient  transfection assays. The 5' nucleotide  of  each  construct  is  indkated;  numbering  is  relative to the ATG codon. The location 
and  seauence of each  of the Mvb bindino sites is  shown. (B) Sequence of the mutations  introduced  into the Myb binding sites in constructs 
MI Mut] MI1 Mut, and MI and MI1 Mut. 
The relative activity of the -910 construct that contains 
the previously defined Myb binding sites (MI-MIII)24 was 
determined. The luciferase activity of the MI-MI11 construct 
relative to a promoterless luciferase construct was 5.7-fold 
higher in Molt4 cells and 0.98 in K562 cells. A deletion at 
-836 was made to examine the role of the 5' most Myb 
binding site (Myb 111) located at -840 from the ATG codon. 
The activity (relative to the promoterless luciferase con- 
struct) was 5.72 in Molt-4 cells and 1.39 in K562 cells. 
This change was minimal when compared with the -910 
construct (Fig 2). 
Finally we assayed the activity of a construct that deleted 
the remaining two Myb binding sites (Del). This construct 
included 73 1 bases upstream from the ATG codon. Lucifer- 
ase activity for this construct was higher in both cell lines 
than either of the two previous constructs. In Molt-4 the 
relative luciferase activity was 12.81 and in K562 it was 
4.21 (Fig 2). This represents a  2.2-fold and a 4.3-fold change 
in activity, respectively, over the construct containing the 
intact Myb sites. 
From these findings we conclude that the 5' most Myb 
binding site (Myb 111) is not active in human T- and myeloid 
cell lines. However, the increase in activity of the Myb I1 
and Myb I deletion indicates that the region containing these 
two sites is an important negative regulatory region of c- 
myb gene expression in these hematopoietic cell lines. 
MI-111 
MI-11 
Del 
MybIII 
MybJl 
MybI 
H 
I 
MI-111 
Fig 2. Results of transient transfection analyses of the indicated 
c-myb promoter-luciferase constructs in Molt4 (m) and K562 cells 
(0). The luciferase activity is relative 
to a promoterlesa luciferase 
construct. The bars  represent SD. The constructs are shown  schsmat- 
ically  below the graph. 


1876 
GUERRA, WITHERS, AND BOXER 
. .  
MI1 Mut 
MI Mut 
MI-MI1 Mut 
Myb III 
MybII 
 
MybI 
x x x x H  
l 
MII Mut 
Myb III 
Myb XI MybI 
MI-MI1 Mut 
Fig 3. Results of transient transfection analyses of the c-my6 pro- 
moter-luciferase constructs with mutations in  the  Myb 
binding sites. 
The constructs are shown schematically below  the graph (B), Molt- 
4; (0). 
K562. 
Myb binding sites Myh I and Myh I1 are responsible for 
cis-acting negative regulation in T cells. To determine 
whether the Myb I and Myb I1 binding sites were the cis- 
acting elements responsible for the change in activity with 
the deletion constructs, we  used three Myb binding site mu- 
tants (see Fig IB). These mutants replace four of the six 
bases in the Myb binding sites to effectively destroy the 
sites. The mutations were introduced into the -910 construct 
(MI-MIII). Myb I and Myb I1 were mutated individually and 
together. We did not mutate Myb Ill because our previous 
results indicated that  it contributed little to the regulation of 
expression of c-myh. 
The relative luciferase activity of the Myb I1 mutant was 
1.32-fold higher than the wild type construct in Molt 4 cells 
(7.52 v 5.70), while the activity of the Myb I mutant was 
1.85-fold higher (10.53 v 5.70). However, when  we 
transfected Molt-4 cells with the MI and MI1 double mutant, 
the relative luciferase activity increased to 19.81, a 3.5-fold 
change (Fig 3). The increase in activity seen  with the double 
mutant is higher than that seen when  both sites are deleted, 
indicating that the deleted region may also include a positive 
regulatory element. Our findings suggest that the Myb I site 
is more active than the Myb I1 site; furthermore, the increase 
in activity seen with the double mutant indicates that the 
interaction between Myb I and Myb I1 is additive in Molt- 
4 cells. Similar results were obtained in the Jurkat T-cell 
line (D.A.W. and L.M.B., unpublished data, March 1994). 
In K562 cells the relative luciferase activity of the Myb 
I1 mutant was 0.88 that of the wild 
type construct and the 
relative activity of the Myb I mutant was 1.37 that of the 
wild type construct. The activity obtained with the double 
mutant MI&II was 1.18 relative to the wild type promoter 
construct (Fig 3). These numbers are not significantly differ- 
ent from the activity of the wild type promoter; these results 
suggest that the Myb binding sites are not functional in K562 
cells. 
EMSA shows three complexes. EMSAs were performed 
with  both  Molt-4 and K562 nuclear extracts; the results were 
identical with  both  cell lines. We used double stranded oligo- 
nucleotides of the  Myb binding sites and of the two mutated 
Myb sites. We found that the Myb I and Myb I1 sites yielded 
similar patterns with an intense faster migrating complex (3 
in Fig 4A) and two slower migrating complexes ( 1  and 2 in 
Fig 4A). A greater amount of the slowest migrating complex 
( 1  in Fig 4A) was formed with the Myb I site, while the 
Myb I1 site yielded  more of the intermediate complex (2 in 
Fig 4A) and no complex 1. Three bands of high electropho- 
retic mobility were also seen. The middle complex was non- 
specific (labeled NS in Fig 4); the other two complexes were 
specific and varied 
in amount in different nuclear extract 
preparations. They may represent proteolytic breakdown 
products of proteins in the slower migrating complexes. We 
have not further characterized them. The Myb Ill oligonucle- 
otide did not form any of the complexes 1-3 seen with the 
Myb I and Myb I1 oligonucleotides (Fig 4A). The two mu- 
tated Myb sites, MI Mut and MI1 Mut, did not form com- 
plexes 1 through 3 seen with the wild-type Myb sequences 
(Fig 4A). 
Competition studies showed that a 100-fold molar excess 
of Myb I competed against labeled Myb I and complexes 2 
and 3 formed with labeled Myb I1 (Fig 4B and C). A 100- 
fold molar excess of Myb I1 competed against labeled Myb 
I1 and complexes 2 and 3 formed with labeled Myb I (Fig 
4B and C). Competition with either Myb Ill or an irrelevant 
sequence (NF-KB  site) at 100-fold molar excess had  no effect 
on the complexes. The mutated Myb I site (MI Mut) did  not 
compete against the complexes formed with labeled Myb I 
(Fig 4B) and, likewise, the mutated Myb I1 site (MI1 Mut) 
did  not compete against the complexes formed  with labeled 
Myb I1 (Fig 4C). We conclude that the Myb I and I1 sites 
form specific complexes and cross-compete with each other; 
however, the Myb I11 site and the mutated Myb I and Myb 
I1 sites do not form 
these complexes or compete against 
them. Complexes similar to those observed with  Molt-4 nu- 
clear extract are formed with labeled Myb I and I1 oligonu- 
cleotides with nuclear extract from K562 cells. Nuclear ex- 
tract from K562 cells yielded complexes 1 through 3 with 
labeled Myb I and complexes 2 and 3 with labeled Myb I1 
(Fig 4D). These complexes were indistinguishable from 
those formed with Molt-4 nuclear extract (Fig 4A). 
Both c- and B-Myh hind to the Myh binding sites in the 
c-myh 5’Jlank. Because c- and B-Myb have been reported 
to bind to identical DNA sequences, we  wanted to determine 
which  protein was present in the bands observed in EMSA. 
Northern analysis showed that the Molt-4 cell line expressed 
high levels of  c-myh  RNA  and  that  B-myh  mRNA 
was also 
present. In K562 cells the amount of c-myh mRNA was 
lower than  that of  B-myh, while the amount of  B-myh  mRNA 
was approximately equivalent in Molt-4 and  K562 cells (un- 
published data). Western analysis of nuclear extracts from 
these two cell lines confirmed these results at the protein 
level (J.G. and L.M.B., unpublished data, April 1994). The 


NEGATIVE REGULATION OF C-MY6 EXPRESSION 
1877 
1 -  
2 -  
3 -  
C W  
anti-Myb antibody we  used for the Western blot is capable 
of recognizing chicken, mouse, and human c-Myb, and it 
cross-reacted weakly  with  B-myb. 
The EMSA complexes from Myb I and Myb I1 were ex- 
posed to UV light to cross-link the labeled DNA to the 
proteins  and  then  eluted  from  the  gel.  SDS-PAGE  showed  that 
each  complex  contained two proteins  (Fig  5A).  When  the 
migra- 
tion  was  corrected for the  bound  oligonucleotide,  the  molecular 
masses  of  these  proteins  were 75 and 108 kD. These  correspond 
Fig 5. UV cross-link analysis of the proteins in 
the EMSA complexes. (A) SDS polyacrylamide gel 
analysis of the UV cross-linked EMSA complexes 
formed  with  Molt4 nuclear extract  and  Myb I and 
Myb II binding  site oligonucleotides. The migration 
of  the  molecular-weight standards is  shown  on  the 
left. When the  migration  is corrected for  the  bound 
oligonucleotide sequences, the molecular masses of 
the two proteins are 75 and 108 kD. C l  is EMSA 
complex 1, C2 is EMSA complex 2, and C3 is EMSA 
complex 3. (B) Western blot analysis of  the  UV 
cross- 
linked  proteins in the EMSA complexes with  Myb I 
and  Myb II sites. This gel was  run  simultaneously 
with the one in (A). BP2 anti-Myb  antibody  was used 
at a dilution of 1:lO.OOO. When the  proteins in the 
EMSA complexes were analyzed without  UV cross- 
linking, proteins  of 75 and 108 kD  were observed. 
to the  molecular  masses of c-Myb  and  B-Myb,  respectively. To 
confirm that the 
75 kD protein was c-Myb, 
a Western blot 
analysis  of  the  protein  in  the  gel  shift  complex  was  performed. 
The BP2 antibody reacted with 
two protein bands that comi- 
grated  with  the  two  bands seen on W cross-link  analysis  (Fig 
5B).  The  larger  band  was  very  light  even  when  the  c-Myb  band 
was overexposed. The faster migrating bands observed below 
each  of  the c- and  B-Myb  bands  on  Western  blots  corresponded 
to  Myb  protein  that  was  present in the  complex  but  was  not UV 
A 
MI 
c1 c3 
e- . 
F 
97.4 kD - 
4" 
69kD - F 
46 kD - 
B 
MI1 
MI 
c2 
 
c3 
 
c1 
 
c3 
MI1 
c2 c3 
U 
" 
" 
97.4 kD - 
69 kD - 
46 kD - 


1878 
GUERRA, WITHERS, AND BOXER 
cross-linked to the DNA probe. The shift in size due to the 
covalently attached DNA probe is further evidence that c-Myb 
and B-Myb bind to the MI and MII sequences. 
DISCUSSION 
The central role 
that c-Myb plays in the regulation 
of 
hematopoietic  cell  development  has  fueled research into  the 
regulation of its expression. 
We chose to examine 
c-myb 
regulation  in hematopoietic  cells  because c-myb is primarily 
expressed  in these  cells. The regulation of c-myb expression 
is complex,  and both transcription initiation and a block  to 
transcription elongation have been shown to be important. 
We  have  focused  on transcription  initiation  of  c-myb in this 
study. Our preliminary data  show that the activity  of the  c- 
myb 5‘ flanking region-luciferase construct 
increases by 8- 
to 12-fold  when the  Jurkat  T-cell  line  is 
activated  with either 
phorbol esters  or  ionomycin (S.C. Phan  and L.M.B., unpub- 
lished data, February 1995). It is possible that steady-state 
levels  of c-myb mRNA  in  human T cells are also regulated 
by the block to 
transcription elongation, which has 
been 
previously described in the mouse 
c-myb first intron in B 
and myeloid cell lines.”436 Further studies are required to 
determine  the  relative  contributions 
of  transcription  initiation 
and  the  block  to  elongation  to 
the  regulation  of  c-myb 
expres- 
sion in  human T cells. 
By transient transfection 
studies with deletions of the  c- 
myb promoter region linked 
to luciferase, we have deter- 
mined that  the  Myb I and  Myb I1 sites  function as negative 
regulators  of  c-myb expression in Molt-4 T cells.  By muta- 
tion of each  site, individually, we  found that Myb I is more 
active as a  negative  regulatory  site than  Myb I1 is.  Mutation 
of both Myb I and  Myb I1 sites showed that there was an 
additive  increase in activity in T cells. The results of these 
experiments  provide  striking  evidence  for 
the  negative regu- 
latory role of these  two sites. The  Myb I and  Myb I1 muta- 
tions we used were identical in sequence to those used by 
Nicolaides  et  and  do 
not  bind  bacterially 
expressed  c- 
Myb protein or c-Myb protein  in  nuclear  extracts. We have 
confirmed the function of the Myb I and Myb I1 sites in 
another  T-cell  line, Jurkat  (D.A.W.  and  L.M.B., unpublished 
data, March 
1994). The results of the deletion analysis in 
the  myeloid  cell  line K562 suggest  that  a  negative  regulatory 
region is  removed in the -731 deletion construct.  However, 
in contrast to the results in T cells, the Myb binding sites 
appear  to  be  nonfunctional in K562 cells. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed three com- 
plexes of retarded mobility 
with the Myb 
I site and two 
complexes with the Myb I1 site. We have been unable to 
show that Myb  binds  to  the  Myb Ill site. Nicolaides et alZ4 
found that Myb 
111 bound c-Myb protein only when less 
stringent conditions  were used compared  with those  required 
for  binding  to  the  Myb I and I1 sites. The  Myb 111 site  does 
not contain the Myb binding consensus 
sequence, and it 
appears  to  have  no  function 
in either Molt-4,  Jurkat, or K562 
cells. 
We used UV cross-linking of each of the EMSA com- 
plexes  to  determine  whether any  proteins other than c-Myb 
contacted  these  sequences. Our results show  that  proteins of 
the  same  sizes  as  c-  and  B-Myb  are 
present in  each  complex 
with more  B-Myb in the  complexes of lower mobility, I and 
2. We have confirmed by Western analysis 
that the Myb 
proteins are present  in 
the  EMSA  complexes.  We 
have 
shown that c-  and  B-Myb contact DNA in each of the corn- 
plexes C1-C3, but the presence of accessory  proteins  in  the 
complexes  may  cause  the different  migration  patterns of the 
C l  and C2 complexes on EMSA. 
Whether both c-Myb and B-Myb 
have access to these 
sites in vivo and thus function as negative regulators of 
c- 
myb expression in T cells is unclear. Although both c- and 
B-Myb in K562 nuclear extract bind to these sites in vitro, 
there is no functional activity associated with these sites in 
K562 cells. It is unclear whether 
access of the proteins to 
these sites is limited 
in K562 cells or whether 
accessory 
proteins that are required for interactions with other proteins 
of the transcriptional apparatus 
are lacking in K562 cells. 
In transient  transfection experiments in fibroblasts c-Myb 
has been shown to positively autoregulate its 
own expres- 
sion*‘; the effect of B-Myb was  not determined. In the  Molt-4 
T cell line, we attempted to  determine  whether cotransfection 
with  a  c-myb  expression  vector  resulted 
in downregulation  of 
the c-myb promoter. However,  we saw  no change in reporter 
activity even at  ratios  of 5: 1 of the c-myb expression  vector 
to c-myb promoter construct. We believe that our inability 
to alter  expression of the  c-myb  reporter  construct is due  to 
the high 
endogenous level of 
c-Myb expression in these 
cells. In support of this, we saw by Western analysis that 
there  was no increase in the  amount  of c-Myb protein  after 
transfection  of  the c-myb expression  vector into  Molt-4  cells 
(J.G. and L.M.B., unpublished data, March 
1994). Another 
explanation is  that  access to the vacant Myb binding  sites  is 
restricted  in some manner (see below). Molt-4  cells  express 
approximately four times as much c-Myb as 
B-Myb and 
K562 cells  express less c-Myb,  but approximately  equivalent 
amounts of B-Myb  compared with Molt4 cells. One  expla- 
nation for  the  difference in  activity of the Myb binding  sites 
between  the two  cells  lines is  that c-Myb binds to these  sites 
in Molt-4  cells,  but  not in K562 cells.  Alternatively,  B-Myb 
may regulate c-myb expression  or the ratio of the  two  pro- 
teins in the  cell may  determine which Myb protein  binds to 
these  sites  in  the c-myb promoter. We  have  not been able  to 
find a sequence that will differentially bind c-Myb and not 
b-Myb to use  in our reporter  constructs. 
Although some regions of the c-rnyb promoter are con- 
served among different species, the Myb binding sites do 
not appear to be present in the chicken promoter. In the 
mouse 5’ flanking sequence, two potential c-Myb binding 
sites are located on the antisense strand 
at approximately 
-670 bp upstream of the  ATG  codon.  These  two sites are 
separated from  each  other by 1 1 bp;  Myb I and  Myb I1 are 
separated by 8 bp in the human sequence. It is not known 
whether c-Myb binds 
to the murine 
sites or whether this 
region exhibits any regulatory activity. 
The  fact that the  Myb binding sites in the 
human c-myb 
5’ flanking  region  function as negative  regulators of expres- 
sion in these T-cell  lines is in clear contrast to their role in 
fibroblasts. In addition, the  Myb binding sites appear to be 
nonfunctional in a myeloid 
cell line. This is an example of 
cell-type  specific  regulation of the expression of a gene.  We 


NEGATIVE REGULATION OF C-MY6 EXPRESSION 
1879 
have been unable to clearly document protection of the Myb 
sites in Molt4 cells by in vivo footprinting. Although these 
negative results have other interpretations, it is possible that 
the majority of the Myb sites are not occupied in cells that 
express high levels of c-Myb. Our preliminary data suggest 
that the Myb I and Myb I1 sites are occupied in resting 
primary human T cells that express low levels of c-Myb. In 
activated T cells that express high levels of c-Myb, we are 
not able to detect protein binding to these sites. How access 
to the majority of these sites would be blocked is not clear, 
but  it has been shown recently that c-Myb binding to DNA 
is sensitive to methylation of cytosine residues.46 Other re- 
gions of the c-myb promoter function as positive regulators 
of expression in hematopoietic cells and we are currently 
investigating these. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Brian Feeley for expert technical assistance. 
REFERENCES 
1. Moscovici C: Leukemia transformation with avian myelo- 
blastosis virus: Present status. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 71:79, 
1975 
2. Baluda MA, Goetz IE: Morphological conversion of cell cul- 
tures by avian myeloblastosis virus. Virology 15:185, 1961 
3. Furakawa Y, Piwnica-Worms H, Emst TJ, Kanakura J,  Griffin 
JD: cd2 gene expression at the 
G1 to S transition in human T- 
lymphocytes. Science 250:805, 1991 
4. Gewirtz A, Anfossi G, Venturelli D, Valpreda S, Sims R, 
Calabretta B: GllS transition in normal human T-lymphocytes re- 
quires the nuclear protein encoded by c-myb. Science 245: 180, 1989 
5. Anfossi G, Gewirtz AM, Calabretta B: An oligomer comple- 
mentary to c-myb encoded mRNA inhibits proliferation of human 
myeloid leukemia cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:3379, 1989 
6. Barletta C, Perlicci PG, Kenyon LC, Smith SD, Dalla-Favera 
R: Relationship between c-myb locus and  the 6q-chromosomal abbe- 
ration in leukemias and lymphomas. Science 235:1064, 1987 
7. Gonda TJ, Metcalf D: Expression of  myb,  myc and fos proto- 
oncogenes during the differentiation of a murine myeloid leukemia. 
Nature 310:249, 1984 
8. Ramsey RG, Ikeda K, Rifkind RA, Marks PA: Changes in 
gene expression associated with induced differentiation of erythro- 
leukemia: Protooncogenes, globin genes, and cell division. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 83:6849, 1986 
9. Slamon DJ, Boone TC, Murdock PC, Keith DE, Press MF, 
Larson RA, Souza LM: Studies of the human 
c-myb gene and its 
product in human acute leukemias. Science 233:347, 1986 
10. Westin EH, Gallo RC, Arya SK, Eva A, Souza LM, Baluda 
MA, Aaranson SA, Wong-Staal F: Differential expression of the 
amv gene in human hematopoietic cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
79:2194, 1982 
11. Gewirtz AM, Calabretta B: A c-myb antisense oligodeoxy- 
nucleotide inhibits normal human hematopoiesis in vitro. Science 
242:1303, 1988 
12. Mucenski ML, McLain K, Kier AB, Swerdlow SH, Schreiner 
CM, Miller TA, Pietryga DW, Scott WJJ, Potter SS: A functional 
c-myb gene is required for normal murine fetal hepatic hematopoie- 
sis. Cell 65:677, 1991 
13. Calabretta B, Sims RB, Valtier M, Caracciolo D, Szcylik C, 
Venturelli D, Ratajczak M, Beran M, Gewirtz AM: Normal and 
leukemic hematopoietic cells manifest differential sensitivity to in- 
hibitory effects of c-myb antisense oligodeoxynucleotides: An in 
vitro study relevant to bone marrow 
purging. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 88:2351, 1991 
14. Biedenkapp H, Borgmeyer U, Sippel A E ,  Klempnauer KH: 
Viral myb oncogene encodes a sequence-specific DNA-binding ac- 
tivity. Nature 335:835, 1988 
15. Ness SA, Marknell A, Graf T: The v-myb oncogene product 
binds to and activates the promyelocyitc specific mim-l gene. Cell 
59:1115, 1989 
16. Moelling K, Pfoff  E, Beug H, Beimling P, Bunte T, Schaller 
HE, Graf T DNA binding activity is associated with purified Myb 
proteins from AMV and E26 viruses and is temperature-sensitive 
for E26 ts mutants. Cell 40:983, 1985 
17. Klempnauer KH, Sippel AE: The highly conserved amino- 
terminal region of the protein encoded by the v-myb oncogene func- 
tions as a DNA-binding domain. EMBO J 6:2719, 1987 
18. Klempnauer KH, Ramsey G, Bishop JM, Moscovici MG, 
Moscovici C, McGrath JP, Levinson AD: The product of the retrovi- 
ral transforming gene v-myb is a truncated version of the protein 
encoded by the cellular oncogene c-myb. Cell 33:345, 1983 
19. Boyle WJ, Lampert MA, Lipsick JS, Baluda MA: Avian my- 
eloblastosis virus and E26 virus products are nuclear proteins. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 81:4265, 1984 
20. Boyle WJ, Lipsick JS, Reddy EP, Baluda MA: Identification 
of the leukemogenic protein of avian myeloblastosis virus and its 
normal cellular homologue. Proc Natl  Acad Sci USA 80:2834, 1983 
21. Howe K, Reakes C, Watson R: Characterization of the se- 
quence specific interaction of mouse c-myb protein with DNA. 
EMBO J 9:161, 1990 
22. Sakura H, Kanei-Ishii C, Nagase T, Nakagoshi H, Gonda T, 
Ishii S: Delineation of the three functional domains of the transcrip- 
tional activator encoded by the c-myb protooncogene. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 86:3982, 1989 
23. Cogswell J, Cogswell P, Kuehl WM. Cuddihy A, Bender T, 
Engleke U, Marcu K, Ting J: Mechanisms of c-myc regulation by 
c-Myb in different cell lineages. Mol Cell Biol 13:2858, 1993 
24. Nicolaides N, Gualdi R, Casadevall C, Manzella L, Calabretta 
B: Positive autoregulation of c-myb 
expression via myb binding 
sites in the 5’ flanking region of the human c-myb gene. Mol Cell 
Biol 11:6166, 1991 
25. Klempnauer K-H, Amold H, Biedenkapp H: Activation of 
transcription by v-myb: evidence for two different mechanisms. 
Genes Dev 3:1582, 1989 
26. Siu G, Wurster AL, Lipsick JS, Hedrick SM: Expression of 
the CD4 gene requires a Myb transcription factor. Mol Cell Biol 
12: 1592, 1992 
27. Melotti P, Ku D-H, Calabretta B: Regulation of the expression 
of  the hematopoietic stem cell antigen CD34: Role of c-Myb. J Exp 
Med 179:1023, 1994 
28. Hernandez-Munain C, Krangel MS: Regulation of the T-cell 
receptor 6 enhancer by functional cooperation between c-Myb and 
core-binding factors. Mol Cell Biol 14:473, 1994 
29. Ku DH, Wen SC, Engelhard A, Nicolaides NC, Lipson KE, 
Marino TA, Calabretta B: c-myb transactivates cdc2 expression via 
Myb binding sites in  the 5”flanking region of the human cdc2 gene. 
J Biol Chem 268:2255, 1993 
30. Nakagoshi H, Takemoto Y, Ishii S: Functional domains of 
the human  B-myb gene product. J Biol Chem 268:14161, 1993 
3 1. Howe KM, Watson RJ: Nucleotide preferences in sequence- 
specific recognition of DNA c-myb protein. Nucleic Acids Res 
19:3913, 1991 
32. Foos G, Grimm S, Klempnauer K-H: Functional antagonism 
between members of the myb family: B-myb inhibits v-myb induced 
gene activation. EMBO J 11:4619, 1992 
33. Mizuguchi G, Nakagoshi H, Nagase T, Nomura N, Date T, 
Ueno Y, Ishii S: DNA binding activity and transcriptional activator 


1880 
GUERRA, WITHERS, AND BOXER 
function of the  human  B-Myb protein compared with c-Myb. J Biol 
Chem 2659280, 1990 
34. Bender T, Thompson C, Kuehl W: Differential expression of 
c-myb mRNA in murine B lymphomas by a block to transcription 
elongation. Science 237: 1473, 1987 
35. Watson R: A transcriptional arrest mechanism involved in 
controlling constitutive levels of mouse c-myb mRNA. Oncogene 
8:267, 1988 
36. Watson RJ: Expression of the c-myc and c-myb genes is 
regulated independently in differentiating mouse erythroleukemia 
cells by common processes of premature transcription arrest and 
increased mRNA turnover. Mol Cell Biol 8:3938, 1988 
37. Reddy C, Reddy E: Differential binding of nuclear factors to 
the  intron 1 sequences  containing  the  transcriptional  pause  site  correlates 
with c-myb exression. hoc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:7326, 1989 
38. Hahn S, Hahn M, Hayward W: Structural organization of 
upstream exons and distribution of transcription start sites in the 
chicken c-myb gene. Mol Cell Biol 9:837, 1989 
39. Kim W, Baluda M: Hematopoietic lineage specific heteroge- 
neity in the S' flanking region of the chicken proto-myb transcript. 
Mol Cell Biol 9:3771, 1989 
40. Nicolaides N, Correa I, Casadevalli C, Travali S. Soprano K, 
Calabretta B: The  Jun family members cdun and JunD transactivate 
the human 
c-myb promoter via an AP-1 element. J Biol Chem 
267:19665, 1992 
41. Mountz JD, Subler MA: Regulation of c-myb oncogene ex- 
pression in immature and mature murine T cells. Mol Immunol 
30:787, 1993 
42. Jacobs SM, Gorse KM,  Westin  EH: Identification of a second 
promoter in the human c-myb 
proto-oncogene. Oncogene 9:227, 
1994 
43. Higuchi R: Recombinant PCR, in Innis M, Gelfand D, Snin- 
sky J, White T (eds): PCR Protocols: A Guide to Methods and 
Applications. San Diego, CA, Academic, 1990, p 177 
44. Chodosh LA:  in Ausubel FM (eds): Current Protocols in  Mo- 
lecular Biology. New York, NY, Greene Publishing and Wiley- 
Interscience, 1988, p 12.5.1 
45. Ibanez CE, Lipsick JS: Transactivation of gene expression by 
v-myb. Mol Cell Biol 10:2285, 1990 
46. Klempnauer K-H: Methylation-sensitive DNA binding by v- 
myb and c-myb proteins. Oncogene 8: 11 I ,  1993 
